The glass of water you drank was once a cloud.
The breath you've just taken owes its life-giving oxygen to millions of tiny plankton in the ocean or to a majestic rainforest tree.
The world's ecosystems are a beautifully complex network that we all belong to.
We need to connect with other species to understand our place in the world.

I can’t pinpoint when it was I realised it was time to reclaim the word garden. I can’t say when I decided to own it, to give it air and attention; to reimagine it. 

I do know, though, that my commitment to it grows with every news report of impending climate catastrophe, every new plant placed on an ever-expanding endangered species list, every time a politician justifies a project with potentially disastrous environmental outcomes as “good for the economy.” 

If our politicians spent more time with their hands in the soil, they might realise that an environmental disaster is a human disaster—they’re one and the same. Any one of us simple “salt-of-the-earth” types could tell our supposedly sophisticated leaders this.

I am a gardener. I can’t think of a more important responsibility. Gardening is not just a set of tasks. It’s not restricted to backyards, courtyards, balconies. It can, and should, happen anywhere, everywhere. 

Gardening is simply a framework for engagement with our world, grounded in care, action and intimacy with place. To garden is to care deeply, inclusively and audaciously for the world outside our homes and our heads. It’s a way of being that is intimately interwoven with the real truths of existence—not the things we’re told to value (money, status, ownership), but the things that actually matter (sustenance, perspective, beauty, connection, growth).

To be a gardener is to give a fuck. To be a gardener is to be invested in a place—to know it, to protect it, to be present to it.

When you plant a seed in a garden, you don't dig it up everyday to see if it has sprouted yet. You simply water them and clear away the weeds - you know that the seed will grow in time. Similarly, just do your daily practice and cultivate a kind heart. Abandon impatience and instead be content creating the causes for goodness; the result will come when it is ready.

Like any ecosystem, the social media networks that we are part of are also part of us. They shape us. With recent trends toward platforms trying to get users to create and consume more short-form content quicker, I wonder the impact that has on us. The more we focus on online engagement, the easier it becomes to disengage from the world around us at a time when we need to engage more than ever.

We pat ourselves on the back for creating the internet, but the internet was created long ago and it was existing underneath our feet. Trees are using it as a way to care for one another, to protect different species, to work in concert in a kind of symbiosis with other aspect of the forest.

The idea is that gardening is a metaphor for taking care of the space, but there are no gardeners. It’s not a singular role, it’s a verb.

As a seed, I was shot out the back end of a blue jay
when, heedless, she flew over the meadow.
She had swallowed me in my homeland when she spied me
lying easy under the sun—briefly, I called her Mother
before I passed through her gullet like a ghost.
In a blink of God’s eye I was an orphan. I trembled
where I fell, alone in the dirt. That first night
was a long night, early May and chilly, and I remember
rain filled my furrow. I called out for mercy—
only a wolverine wandered by. I cursed my luck,
I cursed the happenstance of this world, I smelled
his hot stink, but he nosed me deep into the mud—
this was the gift of obscurity. I germinated, hidden
from the giants of earth, the jostling stalks,
the various, boisterous bloomers, and this was my salvation.
After seven days and nights I pushed through—
yes. Here I am, kissable: your tiny, purple profusion.

Gardens believe slow time is beautiful. They are designed to support us in reclaiming our time rather than being organized by it. 

Gardens recognize that periods of rot, weeds, and even death are natural parts of the ecosystem cycle. They value practice over perfection.

Gardens embrace that gardens and their gardeners are ever-shifting and complex. The design of digital gardens evolves to adapt and value complexity. They embrace the design challenge of clarity that is not at the expense of its users’ dynamicism.

Gardens hold a component of discovery where gardeners may be delighted or surprised by what they may find. They are designed to embrace a culture of learning, where one may be open to be changed by ideas.

Gardens are not about creating utopias. Rather, they design towards the small and slow progress of protopias, as defined by futurist Kevin Kelly as “a state that is better today than yesterday.” We need protopias, alternatives, and the seeds of gardens. We need space to dream, and for that dreaming to connect to concrete action.